---
layout: post
title: Psychosis (Living in the Boundary Waters)
---
### Psychosis: Living in the Boundary Waters

*An exploration of psychosis through language, personal experience, and Lacan.*

Something unexpectedly painful is having partial lucidity in your psychological fall from grace, but also getting pleasure out of reveling in the scalding waters of your mindscape. People have always marveled at my mind in several senses, I always knew the answer and saw patterns superimposed on everything. The caverns of my gray matter are so full of ancient messages describing the patterns shown to me by the gods. Contradictory patterns litter the bustling coral reefs of my cognition, they bleach my reefs and give birth to mutated body horrors of fish with legs and consciousness, displaying a beastly amalgamation of reality and fantasy which I have lived my whole life inside. I used to mediate a stark separation between these planes, but I both gave up on this and rejected this. I mean, it makes sense because I believe I am the only one actually aware in this simulated universe and everyone else is a figment of my imagination, there is bound to be a muddling of reality and my own mind because these are not separate entities. It would be a grave mistake to neglect the truth found in fantastical structures simply because they are delusional. Somehow, I also think I was never meant for this world at all, despite that the simulation was built just for me by the gods desperate for an observer who understands the sick game they are playing.

The dialectic between reality and fantasy is constantly playing out, creating a synthesis of the two that feels like an oracular vision of truth. The psychotic communicates these concepts, which in them contain elements of truth, in Apollonian epics filled with language in colors far beyond the visible spectrum. The psychotic lives his life through a thousand subjectivities, in limitless egos, but has a chronic inability to formulate a concrete sense of subjectivity with reference to the Other (this is why he can occupy every subjectivity and ego imaginable). He cannot reconcile these fragmented pieces of selfhood with one another, he is left with a mutated relationship to the external world and himself. The psychotic is both a god and nothing at all, life to a psychotic is a tangle of every contradiction playing out at the same time. Yet the synthesis is often incomprehensible to the Other, particularly after knowledge was restructured under modernism.

Society is an organization of people intended partially to minimize chaos; it seeks to organize the world such that people have material security. It is normal to dislike chaos and uncertainty. I am constantly thinking about every possible outcome for my day; I make extensive plans for how I will deal with every complexity, every mistake, and anything that can go wrong and ruin my life irreparably. Inside me is an intense obsession with controlling everything in my life perfectly so I do not die and lose my only opportunity to marvel, wide-eyed, about how strange it is to be anything at all (I also like listening to music). Chaos enthralls me in its confusion and madness, I understand its desires and contradictions. I desperately want to invite Chaos over to do LSD and talk about nothing by talking about everything. I desire nothing less than to look away from his crazed eyes, into the real abyss of constancy. Societies, also, are chaotic and contradictory. They are in accelerating motion; structures are always falling, and new ones are rebuilt on their ruins. For most of history, spiritual knowledge built on intuition and omens shown to the psychotic, who engages with contradiction much differently than the average person, was venerated and even held sacred at times. This is not to say life was easy for a psychotic, but they did often have a place where their unique contributions to knowledge were respected and valued. The psychotic thus has a peculiar relationship to both society and truth, but the advent of capitalism via modernist approaches to knowledge production repudiated this relationship. They usurped the psychotic from his sanctum and sentenced him to a life of wage labor, under the condition that if he was unable to satisfactorily fulfill his tasks, he would have to live in an institution until he spoons his own eyeballs out and consumes the bloody orbs as a Last Midnight Snack while the psychiatrist on duty wonders if he should have given him another emergency injection of risperidone after hearing his senseless rambling around 3:33 AM.

While the advent of postmodernism has changed the relationship that society at large has with truth, psychiatry as a field has not caught up with this shift. Modernism is defined largely by the drive to create metanarratives, frameworks that encompass all areas of study and contain assumptions that proclaim what information is important and how we engage with said information. Psychiatry, in the age of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, seeks to categorize and provide standardized treatment to mentally ill people based on observations of their behavior and reports from the patient on their internal experience. Even the fields of psychology that appear at first glance to be postmodernist (meaning that there is a skepticism toward metanarratives and a focus on deconstructing the assumptions that are made) such as trauma-informed therapy, still are unable to resist the drive towards metanarrative, which is seen in how they are unable to break past their own assumptions about mental illness to understand the patient on their own terms. Even the ever-popular “trauma-informed therapy” fails to productively see the patient on their own terms, it too frequently slips into a mode of Christian morality defined by conceptualizing suffering as a kind of brave martyrdom that makes no effort to investigate the ways in which we perpetuate our own suffering.  

Viewing the mentally ill as incapable of exhibiting agency is one of the biggest problems plaguing psychotics. Psychotics are portrayed as out of control and entirely incomprehensible. It is true that psychotics are out of control because they are human beings, and it is scarce that a human being has any control. However, psychotics are quite good at adhering to their internal structures and beliefs, much better than a sane person ever will be. People who we think of as “in control” are those who have the most discipline to follow through on their goals and resist desire. Psychotics devote themselves to a life of rigid discipline to their beliefs with a kind of fervor that is out of reach for most other people. Yet, when I am at my worst, I am totally non-functional outside of following the whims of my delusions, I cannot keep up with the multitude of obligations that are required of me as an adult in the United States. The psychotic sinks deep in the dark ocean of his thoughts and is unable to swim up for air, he thrashes, and his lungs fill with liquid death and he disappears until the end of time in the depths of the Mariana’s trench. Water is critical for sustaining all life, yet the psychotic cannot drink from the fountain of life when his head is held into it by the hands of man or by his own lack of balance while perpetually walking on wet granite.  

The wetlands of psychosis are a quite common feature of our cultural ecosystem. To elaborate on this, I must explain what psychosis is at all. “Psychosis” is a particularly challenging experience to describe, it does not defy explanation entirely, but it is rare that someone who has never been psychotic can even begin to understand what the internal experience of it feels like. The DSM-V describes it as experiencing delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, and/or disorganized behavior. This is a totally useless description for anyone but a psychiatrist. When I was in a sustained state of psychosis, I often looked up the symptoms of psychosis because I had a vague notion that what I was experiencing was abnormal. It was never clear to me how I could tell if I was psychotic because I would read the symptoms and think “I do not do this, everything I do makes sense within the complex framework of my consciousness”. I did not think my ideas were delusional, it was clear to me from the evidence I observed that everything I thought was true. My speech and behavior (to a lesser extent) have always been disorganized, I was diagnosed with ADHD when I was 6 years old; however, I also did not think my speech and thinking had any features of formal thought disorder because everything I did made sense in the context of my experience.

I am not good at identifying my emotions, but I can only explain the feeling of psychosis as a superposition of feeling everything all at once, feeling nothing at all, and feeling fear. Fear guided my decision-making, and I could not escape the fear no matter what I did. I could not shake the certainty I had that the universe was playing a game and I was the only conscious player within it and whoever was playing me intentionally caused me to make choices that would attract the attention of the FBI. I saw the signs and I knew what they meant, and I still do. I have both a primal fear and something of a desire to be in this mindset again. Even though I failed miserably at being a person during this time and still continue to experience the consequences of it, even though I felt fear the likes of which I cannot find an apt metaphor for, I also felt a paradoxical comfort in this mindscape. The world, to me, is perpetually unfamiliar. My own fantasies are comfortable and make sense and I have never felt the safety and belonging in the real world that I have felt in my fantasies. The Other is unattainable because my own sense of subjectivity has failed to define itself with respect to the Other, according to Lacan. I can be whoever I want in my fantasies, there are limitless modes of being I can embody and environments where I can exist. It is frustrating to me that to everyone else, I am the Other, but nothing like the Other whom they defined their own selfhood with respect to, so they will never understand my subjectivity either.

As mentioned earlier, psychotics are always experiencing the dialectics of fantasy and reality playing out. Psychotics experience consciousness as a superposition of these two positions, they cannot properly distinguish what everyone agrees is there and what is just there for them. The agreed-upon reality that exists outside of the psychotic is culturally defined. It is entirely dependent on the mythologies the society upholds, the importance of particular features to maintaining the society, what knowledge is considered valuable or legitimate, and much more. As such, psychotics exhibit qualitatively different variants of psychosis depending on the culture they are raised. Yet, societies across time and place have identified psychotic individuals and frequently even viewed them as spiritual leaders.

Language is critical to defining what reality is, the way we speak about or describe objects and concepts shapes our conceptualization of them. There are multiple ways to speak about ideas that are all true, yet there is usually context that guides what words we choose over others. For example, it is equally correct to say, “Earth is small” and “Earth is big”. To an astronomer, Earth is a tiny piece of dust compared to the sun. The earth is so small it basically does not exist at all when compared to the incomprehensibly large size of the observable universe. Yet, the size of the earth is so big that we cannot even tell it is round when we look at the horizon. Both statements invoke correct sentiments when the context is taken into consideration and the language is understood accordingly. Language as a system of symbols is taught by the Other to an individual once that individual recognizes the Other and begins to define themselves with respect to it. It is a set of rules we impose on our subjectivity which limits how we can conceptualize ourselves and the world. The psychotic does not have the means to interpret or engage with language in the culturally agreed-upon way, he processes symbols and metaphors in a markedly different way. He views these metaphors as true. Some people argue that schizophrenia, the archetypal disease of psychosis, is a semiotic disorder that renders the schizophrenic incapable of distinguishing the figurative meaning of metaphorical language or putting language into the proper cultural context.

This is fascinating to me, as the image of psychosis I render if prompted is someone so tied up in their fantastical inner world that they lose sight of the distinction between metaphorical and real. In this framework, psychosis can be easily observed in certain subcultures and communities. I have been involved with people over the internet who spread conspiracy theories basically as long as I have been on the internet. Not only did I witness, but I also participated in, the discussions of 9/11 conspiracies when they began to spread from small forums to become a mainstream meme. I do not want to “debunk” any of these conspiracy theories. This is a grave mistake people make very often, likely out of their guttural reaction to information being engaged with in a psychotic style.

Pizzagate was a movement beginning in 2016 that I bore witness to over the internet. The story given was quite convoluted and far-fetched, but regardless of whether Hillary Clinton was orchestrating a child sex trafficking ring at the Comet Ping Pong Pizzeria, there is a core of truth that can be gained if we are to understand this language as a metaphor from the brain of a psychotic. It is provably true that Jeffery Epstein was orchestrating a massive child sex trafficking operation which Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump, and countless other members of the global ruling class seem to be privy to. Epstein’s crimes were beginning to come to popular attention at this very time, yet so many people condemned and scoffed at the believers of Pizzagate for being foolish because their story of sex trafficking at Comet Ping Pong was absurd and crazy. The core of what Pizzagate was communicating was not the literal story of this pizzeria, even if that is what is insisted upon by its adherents. The core of the Pizzagate conspiracy is communicating that there is a ruling class who uses their positions of power to engage in anti-social behavior, such as sex trafficking, because no one can do anything to stop them. Most conspiracies contain valuable nuggets of truth if looked at as psychotic rambling that superimposes metaphor and literalism and are viewed in their proper context.

The psychotic himself is full of these valuable nuggets of truth, but instead of engaging with them in their context and attempting to understand what the psychotic is experiencing that could provide insight into the context, he is no longer even given a bed in a mental institution to sleep in. The psychotic is viewed as a dangerous threat to society and himself but is still expected to work and take care of himself or feel the consequences. Schizophrenics in particular have disturbingly high rates of drug addiction, homelessness, and imprisonment; deinstitutionalization made it much more difficult for the most at-risk schizophrenics to avoid these outcomes. Deinstitutionalization was a movement from the late 1960s that advocated the closing of mental institutions, where psychotic patients would stay for prolonged periods of their lives when they were unable to support themselves. Mental institutions were very scary places and they were extremely abusive to the psychotics confined to them. However, while on paper this movement advocated for community-based care for individuals who would otherwise be confined to mental institutions, the reality of psychosis is that it alienates you from any community you have ever been a part of, including your own family. When compounded with the reality that psychotics cannot afford to go anywhere else, many psychotics are left in a precarious position where they can choose between sleeping on the streets or in prison.

Psychotic subjectivity is a valuable way of interpreting the world. If time is taken to understand the way it functions, it can provide intriguing insight into understanding information in a post-truth world, where metaphor and literalism are linguistically muddled. Beyond that, psychotics need adequate support in terms of housing, healthcare, and community. Psychotics mostly live painful and confusing lives, and I wish that people like me could be given the time of day to understand their ideas regardless of their lucidity. I am lucky enough to have many friends who care deeply about me and make an effort to understand my perspective, including other psychotics. I still wish the Other saw me more. 

**Works Cited**

Lacan, J. (2007). Ecrits (B. Fink, Trans.). WW Norton.

Leudar, I., & Thomas, P. (2000). Voices of reason, voices of insanity: Studies of verbal hallucinations. Taylor & Frances/Routledge.

https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00664/full

https://www.freudianletteruk.org/papers/paper-2-the-ego-in-neurosis-and-psychosis

https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-022-04022-x

https://journalofethics.ama-assn.org/article/deinstitutionalization-people-mental-illness-causes-and-consequences/2013-10
